Tweaking Big Images (#286)
pharo-open-documentation/pharo-wiki: General/TweakingBigImages.md

# Tweaking big images

> Pharo is special in the sense that the language and IDE are mixed. This mean that your application runs into the IDE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pharo is special in the sense that the language and IDE are mixed. It means that your application runs together with the IDE.
```

> In some cases we might end-up Pharo images having a large memory consumption (aka Big Images). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, it leads to Pharo images consuming a large amount of memory (aka Big Images). 
```

> The goal of this page is to sum up some tweaking that can be done on Pharo images to improve the performances on such images. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of this page is to sum up some tweaking that can be done on Pharo images to improve the performances of such images. 
```

* [Fast dragging](#fast-dragging)
* [Disable taskbar previews](#disable-taskbar-previews)
* [Tune Garbage Collection](#tune-garbage-collection)
* [Disable Quality Assistant plugin](#disable-quality-assistant-plugin)

## Fast dragging

> While dragging windows in Pharo an animation happens. This animation is not performant and can make the dragging of windows slow in large images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While dragging windows in Pharo, an animation is run. This animation is not performant and can make the dragging of windows slow in large images.
```

> It is possible to workaround this problem by enabling a "fast dragging" option:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a workaround, it is possible to solve this problem by enabling a "fast dragging" option:
```

```Smalltalk
UITheme currentSettings fastDragging: true
```

> This option is reset when we change the theme Pharo and should thus be executed each time you update the theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Remark: This option is reset when one change the theme Pharo. Thus, you should execute this code snippet each time you update the theme.
```

## Disable taskbar previews

> While going oven the taskbar of Pharo, previews of the images are displayed. This feature can be really slow on big images. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While going over the taskbar of Pharo, previews of the images are displayed. This feature can be really slow on big images. 
```

It is possible to disable it:

```Smalltalk
TaskbarMorph showWindowPreview: false
```

## Tune Garbage Collection 

> Pharo is a language with a memory management using garbage collection. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pharo is a language using a [garbage collector](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garbage_collection_(computer_science)) for its memory management. 
```

> When objects are created, memory is allocated to them. Once in a while, the memory is cleaned and the "garbage collector" free the memory of objects that are not been used anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When objects are created, memory is allocated for them. Once in a while, the memory is cleaned and the garbage collector frees the memory of objects that are not used anymore.
```

> This process can be customized via multiple parameters. To understand the impact of those parameters we explain here how the garbage collection works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process can be customized via multiple parameters. To understand the impact of those parameters we explain here how garbage collection works in Pharo.
```

> Pharo memory (aka heap) is divided into multiple spaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because most objects usage stops quickly after their instantiation (we say they have a short life-time), Pharo memory (aka "the heap") is divided into multiple spaces:
```

- The "Old space" contains objects that survived multiples garbage collections (GC). When it is filled, new memory segments are allocated to the old space.

> - The "New Space" contains recenttly created objects. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The "New Space" contains recently created objects. 
```

The "New Space" is divided into 3 sub spaces:
- The "Eden" containing the newest objects created (taking 5/7 of the new space)
- Two survivors spaces (1/7 of the new space each) contains the object that survived some garbage collection already

The Garbage Collector execute two kind of cleanings:

> - The scavenge happens after the Eden is filled at a certain ratio and will clean the Eden. When objects from the eden are still referenced, they are moved to the survivors. There are two survivors: past survivor space and future survivor space (past space and future space for short). Past and future space swap after each scavenge, which empties eden and past space, copying survivors into future space, tenuring overflow to old space and then making future space the new past space. When the survivor space is fill at more than 90%, the survivors are moved to the old space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The **scavenge** happens when the Eden is filled at a certain ratio and will clean the Eden. When objects from the eden are still referenced, they are moved to the survivors. There are two kinds of survivors: past survivor space and future survivor space (past space and future space for short). Past and future space swap after each scavenge, which empties eden and past space, copying survivors into future space, tenuring overflow to old space and then making future space the new past space. When the survivor space is fill at more than 90%, the survivors are moved to the old space.
```

> - The full GC happens when the heap grow past a certain ratio. It will go through the old space and clean the old objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The **full garbage collect** (aka full GC) happens when the heap grow past a certain ratio. It will go through the old space and clean the old objects.
```

By default, the new space size is 3.8Mo. It can be increased to 32 or 64Mo if you have enough memory.

```Smalltalk
Smalltalk vm parameterAt: 44. "9057248"
Smalltalk vm parameterAt: 45 put: 64 * 1024 * 1024
```

> Since the eden size is fixed at startup, this change requires to restart the image.

If you create at some point a lot of objects that will stay for a while, you can increase the size of new memory segments to allocate in order to spend less time to allocate memory. 

By default the growth is of 16Mo.

```Smalltalk
Smalltalk vm parameterAt: 25 put: 32 * 1024 * 1024
```

If your memory needs to grow and shrink a lot, you can also increase the memory threshold above which shrinking object memory happens. 

By default, 32Mo.

```Smalltalk
Smalltalk vm parameterAt: 24 put: 64 * 1024 * 1024
```

You can also increase the ratio of growth and image size at or above which a GC will be performed	post scavenge.

By default, 0.33. This parameter needs to be a float. 

If you use a really high ratio such as 200.0+, no full GC will happen.

```Smalltalk
Smalltalk vm parameterAt: 55 put: 0.7
```

> Note that those 3 last parameters are currently reset during image startup. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: Those 3 last parameters are reset during image startup. 
```

> In order to maintain them, you can use startup actions. See [Session management documentation](SessionsManagement.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In order to maintain them, you can use startup actions. See [Session management documentation](SessionsManagement.md).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 
```

> This might change in the future (https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/issues/477).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This might change in the future (https://github.com/OpenSmalltalk/opensmalltalk-vm/issues/477).
```

> By tweaking those parameters, algorithm that took 9min30 before are now taking less than 5min with images of 1.3Go.

Reviewer: Needed here? This is an anecdote, not really needed here.

Author: It was to point out that it might be a bother to do but it has huge results

Thanks to [Eliot Miranda](http://www.mirandabanda.org/cogblog/microbio/) and [Clément Bera](https://clementbera.wordpress.com/) for the explanations.

For more information: [https://clementbera.wordpress.com/2017/03/12/tuning-the-pharo-garbage-collector](https://clementbera.wordpress.com/2017/03/12/tuning-the-pharo-garbage-collector)

## Disable Quality Assistant plugin

The code browser in Pharo has a plugin to display code critics. This plugin can take some time to compute the rules in case of large images. It is possible to disable it:

```Smalltalk
ClyCriticBrowserPlugin disable
```

> 

Reviewer: Remove trailing newlines.
